Israel's war on Gaza has created uh okay
we're going to go to some live pictures
right now of us SEC State Anthony
Alliance the tremendous solidarity that
we have and continue to have uh in
supporting Ukraine against uh the
Russian aggression uh we talked a little
bit about steps to prepare for the NATO
Summit that will take place in
Washington uh early this summer uh and
uh we also focused on what both
countries have done through the
leadership of uh president erdan and
prime minister mitsakis to bring Greece
and Turkey closer together including the
summit meeting that both leaders had uh
just last month in uh turkey we also
focused uh extensively on uh what turkey
can do using its influence using its
ties to help prevent the conflict in the
Middle East uh from spreading uh and we
also talked about the role that turkey
can play both in the day after for Gaza
in terms of uh uh the challenging
questions of governance Palestinian life
governance uh security rebuilding as
well as the work that it can do with
others to try to produce more lasting
durable peace and security uh in the
region in uh and of course in in Turkey
we also talked about the final steps uh
in the process to ratify Sweden's
accession to Nato in the coming
weeks in uh Greece here in uh suda Bay
first I just want to
really express my appreciation to prime
minister Mr tacis for welcoming us into
his home uh that was very uh very
meaningful um Greece the United States
I've been doing this for 30 years I
can't think of a time when the
partnership the friendship between our
countries has been stronger and we see
that manifested in all sorts of ways
every single day one way that's being
manifested right now is Greece's
participation in operation Prosperity
Guardian to try to ensure that we have
freedom of navigation freedom of
Commerce in the Red Sea which is being
challenged almost daily by the houthis
uh Greece is playing a vital role in
that along with uh many other countries
uh and we had uh discussions about that
uh as well as the remarkable work that's
done here at sud Bay to make sure that
we continue to have a strong platform uh
for ensuring that we can as necessary
deter aggression uh around the
world leaving uh leaving GRE tonight
we're now heading back to the Middle
East this is um the fourth time since
October 7th that I'll be in the region
and uh we'll be there at what remains an
incredibly difficult time for the region
uh in the wake of the October 7th
attacks uh on Israel as we've said from
day one uh we have an intense focus on
preventing this conflict from spreading
uh and a big part of the conversations
we'll be having over the coming days
with all of our allies and partners is
looking at the steps that they can take
using the influence and ties that they
have uh to do just that to make sure
that this conflict doesn't
spread second uh we'll be looking at
what we can do to maximize the
protection for civilians maximize
humanitarian assistance getting into
them uh and also to get hostages out of
Gaza uh the situation for men women and
children uh in Gaza remains dire far too
many Palestinians have been killed
especially children far too many uh
remain incredibly challenged in in terms
of their access to food to water to
medicine to the essentials of life so
it's imperative that we see a
substantial and sustained increase in
the assistance that's getting to them as
well as to the protection of uh
civilians in
general third uh we will focus on the
steps that remain to make sure that
October 7th never happens again uh and
that we get on a path to a
sustainable uh peaceful secure future
for everyone uh that starts with the
work that's going to be necessary in
Gaza itself uh to uh to rebuild uh to
have security uh to have Palestinian L
governance and it goes to the longer
path the broader path uh toward durable
peace and security for Israelis and
Palestinians alike
uh which for us uh as has been the case
from the day one of this Administration
uh has to include the realization of
Palestinian political rights and notably
a Palestinian state with security
assurances for Israel um we'll talk
about what the United States can and
will do in all of these areas to advance
both uh what needs to happen in Gaza and
more broadly what has to happen to build
durable peace and security we'll also be
talking about what all of our allies and
partners can do what are they prepared
to do to assist in this process um these
are not necessarily easy conversations
there are different perspectives
different needs different requirements
but it is vital that we engage in this
diplomacy now both for uh the sake of
the future of Gaza itself and more
broadly the sake of the future for
Israelis and Palestinians and for the
region as a whole there clearly a strong
desire among the majority of people in
the region for a future that is one a
piece of security of deescalation of
conflicts of integration of countries
and that's one path that's one future
the other future is an endless cycle of
violence a repetition of the horrific
events that we've seen um and lives of
uh insecurity uh and Conflict for people
in the region which is what virtually no
one wants
so the work that needs to be done to get
on that first path the steps that need
to be taken the commitments that
countries need to make this is what
we'll be talking about in the days
ahead have Tak any
questions me I guess yes you thank you
um Mr secary in terms of today what
specifically did you ask or did you
explore with the Turks as it relates to
one preventing the spread the escalation
of the conflict one would you like to
see them do and then SEC and then in
terms of the day after and especially on
the security and Reconstruction did you
get any kind of commitment from the
Turks that they're at least willing to
consider even if they didn't come out
and say that they would definitely do
something would would they do those and
then the same thing with the Greeks or
was that less of an issue with with with
the Greeks so now what I can tell you is
this I think from our conversations
today it's clear that turkey's prepared
to play a positive produ role in work
that needs to happen the day after the
uh the conflict ends and as well more
broadly in trying to find a path to
sustainable peace and security uh we had
uh conversations about about that I
can't go into any any details except to
say again they're they're clearly
prepared to play a productive role um I
think they're also prepared as they as
they happen to use the the ties the
influence they have the relationships
they have with some of the critical
players and some of the critical
countries in the region to um do
everything possible to deescalate and to
prevent uh the conflict from spreading
uh turkey can play a really vital role
in doing that uh that was a big part of
our conversation today they clearly have
a shared interest with us in doing just
that and I'm confident from these
conversations that they're going to make
every every possible effort in terms of
the Greeks and in terms of the Greeks we
were very focused on um a couple of
things but particularly the challenge
that's being posed right now by the
booies to um uh to shipping I mean keep
this in mind
90% of global Commerce every single day
is done uh via shipping and when you
have a threat that we have now to
shipping in the Red Sea by the houthis a
threat that's being posed not to any one
country but quite literally to dozens of
countries who are affected and in some
ways to the entire International
Community because this has a big effect
when shipping is made more difficult uh
when ships have to re-root to avoid
danger when insurance rates go up when
the cost of shipping goes up that means
that people are going to be paying more
for heating uh it's going to be they're
going to be paying more for food uh
we're going to have disrupted Supply
chains this is a challenge to countries
around the world and that was reflected
in the fact that we had more than 40
countries sign a clear condemnation of
what the who these are doing Greece is
playing a critical role and of course
it's one of the leading shipping
countries in the world so it has a real
incentive to uphold this International
Norm protecting freedom of navigation
protecting freedom of shipping it's
participating in operation Prosperity
Guardian it's dedicated a frigate uh to
that and that was one of the focuses of
our conversation today Mr secretary uh
you talked about preventing this
conflict from spreading today Hezbollah
launched dozens maybe even as many as 60
missiles into Northern Israel Israel
responded with air strikes on hisbah
Targets in southern Lebanon is this
exactly the kind of expansion
escalation that you're talking about and
how is the United States going to
respond to this and talk to us allies to
handle this we'll be talking to all of
our partners including of course Israel
about this but we've from day
one as I said we've been working to make
sure the conflict doesn't spread one of
the areas of real concern is the border
between um Israel and Lebanon uh and we
want to do everything possible to make
sure that we don't see escalation there
uh but it's very important that Israelis
have uh have Security in the north uh
tens of thousands of people have been
forced from their homes in uh in
Northern Israel because of the threat
posed by Hezbollah we are looking at
ways diplomatically uh to try to diffuse
that uh that challenge that tension so
that people can return to their homes uh
that they can live in peace and security
uh and this is something that we're very
actively working on it's going to be
part of the discussions we have over the
coming days not just in Israel with some
of the other countries
concerned talk about today's attacks in
your meetings with the Turkish leaders
uh not not in any detail but uh we were
focused on a whole series of challenges
that we have to uh to stability to peace
and security and again the role that
turkey can play in trying to make sure
that we don't see escalation uh that we
prevent the the conflict and spreading
that other fronts are are not open and I
think it's clearly in the interests of
virtually all of the countries in the
region to make sure that that doesn't
happen uh and we want to make sure that
countries who feel that way are also
using their ties using their influence
using their relationships with some of
the actors that might be involved to
keep a lid on things to make sure that
we're not seeing uh the spread of
conflict escalation it's clearly a
strongly shared interest and again one
we're really going to focus on over the
coming days is inevitable after the
attack in
Beirut Andrea isn't it an inevitable
reaction to the attack in Beirut and the
assassination nothing's inevitable
because uh countries are always going to
calculate what their interest are and I
think again from the uh perspective of
Israel it's clearly not interested does
not want uh escalation that's been made
clear uh again from the start uh but
they also are have to be fully prepared
to defend themselves and defend the
rights of their people to live uh in uh
in their own country uh in their own
homes but we know that this is not what
Israel wants or seeks it's not what we
want or seek I know from lebanon's
perspective uh it's not in the interest
of Lebanon to see any escalation so the
question is um in large part Hasa and
what actions uh it will take and how
countries that have a relationship with
h that may have some influence can use
those relationships use that influence
to try to keep things uh in check and
meanwhile for us to use our own
diplomacy to see if we can find a way to
uh produce some more sustained Cal uh in
Northern Israel and Southern Lebanon
thanks thanks
everyone US Secretary of State Anthony
blinkin there speaking to reporters uh
in on the Greek island of uh Greece on
the Greek island of cre sorry uh on a
short stop stop over before he begins
what he says is his uh fourth tour of
the Middle East uh since October uh 7th
he just come from uh turkey where he
hadd been meeting with leaders there uh
to discuss a number of issues including
finding a solution to the conflict in
Gaza he talked about uh preventing the
conflict from escalating Beyond Gaza and
maximizing um assistance uh to U
civilians in Gaza and and improving the
humanitarian situation mahj zi is
director of the golf studies Center at
Kar University joins me now in the
studio talk more about this so first of
all your uh thoughts on what you just
heard there from the US Secretary of
State you know has um I I commented on
for uh visit of of blinkin to the region
that is the first time I saw him um and
I I hear him so um showing empathy with
the Palestinian in Gaza that's that's
the first time the second thing uh he's
the first time he talks about rebuild uh
and rebuilding Gaza um and to me it
seems he has educated himself a little
bit about the conflict taking to
consideration 90 days of the conflict
the third Point um it's it's very
interesting that uh it took uh secretary
90 days of the conflict and seeing all
of this killing to admit that um Israel
has no interest to escalation and and uh
and he knows that what Israel is doing
already um I think uh this this kind of
statement um he of course he has
interest to show that the America
American Administration is uh you know
willing to provide some support for uh
peace but in reality uh they are facing
many many challenges uh one of them is
actually their direct support to the
Israelis so far and the perception in
the region and the lack of trust and I
think they have to deal with all of that
together so they can convince the people
even the politician that they are
sincere on solving the problem if we
talk about the uh the situation on the
ground for for Palestinians in Gaza
which as we've been reporting for for
weeks now is increasingly dire he talked
there about uh what he said was you know
maximizing uh the assistance to people
there and getting the humanitarian Aid
what every what virtually every uh a
agency representative that we have
spoken to has said is that the only way
uh to get uh humanitarian Aid into Gaza
safely is through a ceasefire that is
virtually impossible any other way right
so I mean I guess my question is you
know the words are welcomed but it's
yeah there's no there's no action hasm I
mean it everyone knows that if there if
the American wanted they could put more
pressure on the Israelis to facilitate
having more food and water and medicines
into Gaza they they could do that they
could put put pressure on on the Israeli
government but they are not doing it and
because they gave the green line to
Israelis to do whatever they want on
Gaza assuming that they will have their
own security they would achieve their
goals and they they will be more secure
but they know and I think the Biden
Administration should understand from
the history
that uh security cannot be achieved by
achieved by crushing the other nations
they they saw it in Iraq they saw it in
Afghanistan they saw it in Vietnam
everyone knows this and and I'm I'm I'm
there is there is an Israeli journalist
wrote a a piece today in one of the
Israelis newspaper he told he talked
about the uh stupidity in Israeli
politics and it seems to me the
stupidity that cross the globe today
it's obvious that they need to put more
pressure so they can at least
uh reduce the the pre the reduce the the
procedure uh time they it took them many
many weeks just to examine each item
want to go to Gazza and at is everything
everything has been claimed that is
double use or double uh you know uh it
may be used for other purposes and that
complicated the whole thing and I think
today they talk about reusing some of
the medical M material because they
don't have or they cannot replace it
from uh from outside so I think what
happened in in Gaza it's a genocide
because in in in in the absence of
International Community and with with
with with no pressure on Israel I think
the suffer of the Palestinian will will
be uh uh uh uh basically doubled and
increased rapidly with all of this uh uh
um attacks from the Israelis good to get
your perspective on this wor thank you